# Hunt’s Bookshelf

Books were important to John Hunt. When he began his journal in 1770, he gave his model as a passage from the writings of prominent Quaker leader [William Penn (1644-1722)](/entities/w6p55q0b/). Especially in his latter years, he frequently read and commented on passages.

The most used text was the Bible (King James Version) which Hunt quoted or paraphrased, often referring to a specific chapter and verse. Where Hunt does not provide a citation, we have footnoted the Bible chapter and verse. Hunt read widely in the Bible, from Genesis to the Book of Revelations. Robert Aitken printed a Bible in Philadelphia in 1782, and Isaac Collins published his “family bible” in Trenton in 1791. English Bibles belonging to Quaker families were also imported from London, Dublin, and Edinburgh. Hunt used Alexander Cruden’s _Complete Concordance._ There is no evidence that Hunt had access to Anthony Purver’s _A New and Literal Translation of all of the Works of the Old and New Testament_ (1764) although it was listed in the _Catalogue of the Books Belonging to the Library of the Three Monthly Meetings of Friends of Philadelphia_ in 1813. 

He read avidly. In the latter part of the journal he copied long passages about his readings or copied sections in their entirety, using his journal as a sort of commonplace book of significant works; this was also the time of his life when age limited his mobility. Most of his reading was in Quaker books, from the origins of the Society of Friends in the mid 1600s to contemporary works published in the early 19th century. Quaker books are here identified as books written by Quakers, and usually published by Quaker printers in North America and Britain. Many of these books were reprinted several times. A few books he purchased, some were given to him, and very likely he had access to well stocked meeting or subscription libraries. A Moorestown Library Company was organized in May of 1808 with Quakers John Kaighn and Hugh Hollingshead as its first President and Secretary. 

His interest was in religious texts. He either did not read, or did not comment upon in his journal, on secular works, nor did he seem to have had an interest in political questions. A Quaker minister of this time would have been unlikely to have been reading literature, but many Quakers did write on science, or botany. If Hunt read about botany or science he does not mention it in his journal. 

Not all “Quaker” books had Quaker authors. Hunt cited works by Francois Fenelon, William Law, and Thomas à Kempis. Fenelon (1651-1715) was a French Roman Catholic archbishop, theologian, and writer; he crossed Louis XIV because Fenelon espoused Quietist views and defended human rights. [Law (1686-1761)](/entities/w6cv5qpd/), an Anglican curate, was known for his personal integrity and theological writings; he wrote that every day should be viewed as a day of humility. À Kempis (d. 1471), another Catholic priest, wrote _The Imitation of Christ,_ a well-known book on devotion. Likely his copies were published by Quaker printers, such as Abraham Sherman Jr., Joseph Cruikshank and Emmor Kimber, rather than that translated by Methodist leader John Wesley. Works by Law, Fenelon, and à Kempis were also listed in the _Philadelphia Monthly Meetings’ library Catalogue_ of 1813.

Hunt occasionally came across newspapers like the _Pennsylvania Gazette,_ the _Village Record,_ and the _Trenton Federalist._ More often than not he found or was given individual copies by friends. To Hunt’s eye newspapers were full of news of disasters: earthquakes, famine, shipwreck, and disease. His own journal was filled with similar stories of the Yellow Fever epidemics, disease and crop failures. While life may not have been quite so dire as Hunt sometimes imagined, the risk of his family or his neighbors falling victim to accident or disease was a very real possibility. 
