# Structure of Quaker meetings

Philadelphia Yearly Meeting published its first printed Discipline in 1797. Its introduction included a paragraph on the structure of its constituent bodies:
>And for the worship of God, and the more regular and easy proceeding in the service and discipline of the Church, Meetings have been by Divine assistance, as above hinted, set up and established, serviceable and subordinate to each other, as particular meetings Meetings for worship, one or more of which constitute a Preparative Meeting. Monthly, which mostly take In several particular or Preparative Meetings, who are to meet together once a month. Quarterly, including so many monthly Meetings as may under right direction most usually meet together once every three months. And Yearly, which is composed of so many Quarterly Meetings as may most conveniently attend the same; each of which have their respective Powers and Service for the well ordering of Society, and advancement of Truth and Righteousness.[^1]

[^1] _Rules of Discipline and Christian Advices of the Yearly Meeting of Friends._ Philadelphia: Samuel Sansom, 1797, pp. vi-vii.

Among Friends, meetings for worship, also called Particular Meetings, were organized on the principle of silent waiting, where each person could pray, meditate, or “listen to the Light of God.” They were usually held on First Day, the day we call Sunday, but could also occur mid week or as called. Vocal ministry arose when a member felt inwardly led to offer a specific message or prayer. Although anyone could be inwardly led, recorded ministers most frequently  spoke aloud. It was not necessary to be a member to attend such a meeting. Men and women met together for worship.

In the late 18th century, “General Meetings” (for worship) were appointed every three or four months to which children and servants were specifically invited. Separate Youth’s Meetings (for Worship) were also held. John Hunt and Joshua Evans, among others, also arranged for meetings for worship in the local Indigenous and African-American communities.

Preparative Meetings generally oversaw the meetings for worship. It was, in effect, the local “congregation.” Men and women held separate business meetings (at all levels) until the late 19th century. The Preparative Meeting usually held the deeds to the land on which the meetinghouse and burial ground stood. Unlike many other Protestant denominations, the preparative meeting was constituted by the members who worshipped in a home or meeting house, not the building or church in which worship occurred.

And the Preparative Meeting appointed representatives to attend the Monthly Meeting of which it was a part. The Monthly Meeting was the fundamental unit of Friends’ organization. It had responsibility for care of members, authorized removals and marriages, maintained discipline, considered queries, and reported regularly to the quarterly meeting. All business meetings (at all levels) were held in a spirit of worship, and so were in effect meetings for worship for conducting business. In theory, all members in good standing could participate in the monthly business sessions, but the representatives generally presented the business of the Preparative Meeting. 

Quarterly Meeting for business was held four times per year, attended by representatives of all monthly meetings in a given area. It served as an appellate body for disciplinary matters and considered problems too large for a local meeting to solve. A quarterly meeting held the authority to establish or discontinue a monthly, preparative, or particular meeting for worship.  Evesham Monthly Meeting was part of Salem Quarterly Meeting until its division in 1794 when Haddonfield Quarterly Meeting was set off. The Monthly Meetings of Haddonfield, Great Egg Harbor, and Evesham (Hunt's meeting) then constituted the latter.

Yearly Meeting was the highest level of authority within the Society of Friends, a large and autonomous body of Quakers in a particular geographic region. Decisions were binding on the monthly and quarterly meetings within its jurisdiction. It met annually over a period of several days to conduct business, formulate the discipline, receive reports and concerns from its constituent meetings, review the state of the Society, and to communicate with other yearly meetings through epistles. In Hunt’s time, Philadelphia Yearly Meeting included meetings in southern New Jersey, southeastern Pennsylvania, Delaware, the  Eastern Shore of Maryland and a few meetings in Virginia. In 1756, Philadelphia Yearly Meeting first appointed a Meeting for Sufferings to raise and administer relief to Friends who suffered distress as a result of Indian conflicts or governmental persecution. This body could act for the Yearly Meeting during the fifty-one weeks that the latter was not in session.

Hunt also made reference to another yearly meeting, the “Circular” or “Circulating” Yearly Meeting. In the 18th century these annual gatherings circulated within the area of the Quarterly Meeting that managed them. They were not meetings for business and were open to the community.  

Ministers and Elders met monthly, quarterly, and yearly. These were “select” meetings meaning that participation was limited to ministers and elders. In the 18th century a Yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders was held in late March or early April and was also referred to as Spring Meeting.
