---
slug: "/background/joshua-evans/evans-testimonies"
date: "2023-08-22"
title: "Evans's Testimonies"
---

# Evans’s Testimonies

Joshua Evans was deeply motivated by Quaker testimonies, especially those of plainness, peace, and equality.

## Plainness
The plainness testimony was central to much of Evans’s life and conduct, which at times verged on asceticism. In the annual queries, Friends were advised to be “careful to bring up those under their direction in plainness of speech and apparel…” Ministers and elders were particularly advised to bring up their families in “plainness in dress, language, and true moderation.”[^1] This call to avoid superfluity and excess is evident throughout Evans’s journals. 

[^1]: _The Old Discipline: Nineteenth-Century Friends Disciplines in America._  Glenside, Pennsylvania: Quaker Heritage Press, 1999, 99-101.

Evans’s pursuit of “true moderation” impelled him to go beyond Friends’ conventional practices. Most Quakers in the 18th century were easily recognized by their plain dress and plain speech, which consisted, respectively, of gray unornamented clothing and the habit of addressing individuals with the archaic singular pronoun “thou.” Evans, however, was uneasy stopping at these customary practices, and took to wearing undyed clothing and a full beard. As he wrote in his autobiography, he saw the dying process as wasteful, and argued that the effort would be better spent keeping clothes clean:
> The Lord was pleased to give me to see the vanity of and loss of time in dying our garments many colors, some of which is very injurious to the cloth, but the heart and mind so set thereon the pattern must be followed be the damage what it may. And by this means good pieces of cloth are much damaged, and this excess pleaded for only to hide dirt, which seems to me no part of cleanliness. For hiding faults is not a cleansing from sin, so hiding dirt doth not remove the filth thereof, for I should suppose the same quantity of dirt would gather on the dyed as the undyed garment with the same wear. Then surely, if the expense and injury of dying was laid out in washing, we should be more cleanly.[^2]

However, despite his convictions, Evans at first felt great trepidation about “the reproach” others would give him for such singular garments. Three times he crossed from New Jersey to Philadelphia to buy a white hat but lost his nerve at the last moment:
> The cross in wearing white clothes was more than I could bear. I pleaded my insufficiency for such a singular work, fearing I should not bear the reproach thereof, but my pained soul could not get ease until I submitted to . . . wear white clothes. . . . To get a white hat and stockings was as far as I could see at that time, and after wearing my old one till it was not fit to be seen, I went to Philadelphia with intent to get a white hat, but returned home without. . . . I made another trial, and then through weakness got a black one. This brought such trouble on me, I verily thought I felt the terrors of Hell by night and by day, until I became willing to be a reproach among men—and to confess my fault to the man I got the black one of, and offer to pay for the damage done if he would take the hat again and inform me where I could get a white one, which he did. My mind was much bowed but not low enough, for I returned home without buying one.[^3]

Only on his fourth attempt did Evans follow through and buy a white hat. Between his white clothing and his bearded face, Evans’s singular appearance caused some consternation among other Friends, as [discussed elsewhere](/background/joshua-evans/evans-biography).

[^2]: _Journal of Joshua Evans_, autobiography, [p. 13](/journals/A0011540#page013).
[^3]: _Journal of Joshua Evans_, autobiography, [pp. 13–14](/journals/A0011540#page013).

Evans’s commitment to plainness was to some degree motivated by economic concerns. For example, his support of temperance grew out of his worries over food scarcity: 
> In the year 1772, . . . I heard some complain for want of bread. This led me to consider why it was so. As our crops had not much failed, [I was] sure there must be waste somewhere and considered the best of our flour and corn went to the Indies, and that in large quantities for rum etc. And those liquors were so plentifully used in gathering harvest (which is one of our choicest blessings) that it causes much waste, rioting, and drunkenness, insomuch that the cost of rum and the waste of grain which is occasioned (I thought) might feed the poor. These considerations brought a great concern on my mind thinking of a remedy. An answer intelligible to my mind came thus, “use no more rum”.[^4]

[^4]: _Journal of Joshua Evans_, autobiography, [p. 20](/journals/A0011540#page020).  

While not all of Evans’s advocacy for simplicity arose from material considerations (for example, at one point he complained about Friends giving nicknames to their children),[^5] much of his concern was bound up in his analysis of the broader economy.[^6] By the end of his life, Evans’s commitment to plainness, along with his pacifism and advocacy for Native Americans, led him to a sophisticated critique of the use of imported goods. He argued that consuming such items not only violated the plainness testimony but also the peace testimony, since the government used tax revenue from the import of these goods to fund its wars against Native peoples. Evans wrote that it was necessary  
> to refrain the use of those imported goods, as there is so large a duty on them and the money arising therefrom is to hire men to go out to war and maintain them while destroying the poor Indians to make room for us. This would not be doing as we would they should do to us, to send armies of men into the bowels of our country, and destroy our living, and burn our towns, kill our wives and children, as we do theirs. What should we think then? Could we bid good speed to them, or could we think well of those that found themselves money (as we now do) by the use of those foreign articles, on which is a duty of two and half percent, which they say is fifty shillings to every hundred pounds so imported. This, I was told by one of the Congressmen, was for no other purpose but to support the war against the Indians. 

> Now my dear friends, who can say “I am clear of the blood of those poor innocent ones”, no doubt a number of whom would be glad to live as peaceable as any of us and enjoy their wives and children? We do know that money is the very sinews of war—how can we be easy to strengthen those hands that are shedding blood? To me it appeareth a weighty matter, and more especially since I have been in these southern lands, to see and behold how anxious the people are to follow the armies, such as want to get where they can live a lazy life and that by hunting, yea, before the poor Natives are drove so far as that those lazy ones are not in danger of their lives as also their dear children. This I saw when in these parts, Georgia and Tennessee, that now lies bordering on the Indians’ land, driving them further and further. 

> Now friends, where are we? Are not we following on after those wicked men, whose hands we are strengthening by using those foreign goods, when we have aplenty in a less compass of land  to have food and raiment in a more innocent way, and avoid those just reflections cast on us that none are more anxious for land than Friends are. Yea, may it not justly be said that we are pushing them forward who are cruelly destroying the Indians?[^7]

[^5]: “I had much labor to promote the cause of truth and in reviving some ancient testimonies with respect to plainness of speech . . . , which is much departed from in calling our children Betsy, Polly, Peggy, & Nancy, and Tom, Jack, & Harry, when Elizabeth, Mary, Margaret, & Anna, Thomas, John, & Henry is their names given them. I thought it was as far from plainness as ‘you’ to a single person.” _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1797-07-17](/journals/A0011543#1797-07-17).
[^6]: "I believe the vast extensive trade that has and now is carried on in this once favored land has and will prove a curse instead of a blessing. I believe better had it been for mankind if they had never attained the art of crossing the seas in ships. . . . Superfluities so abounds and are imported in abundance, and trade and dealing is run into, and shops set up in almost every hole and corner and the youth encouraged to eat the bread of idleness, and oppressing the poor by extortion." _Journal of Joshua Evans_, autobiography, [p. 25](/journals/A0011540#page025).  
[^7]: _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1797-05-05](/journals/A0011543#1797-05-05).

## Peace

As exemplified in this last quotation, Evans was also dedicated to the peace testimony and saw it as an expression of the golden rule. He wrote that he could not "reconcile war with Christianity, nor the devouring spirit with the Lamb’s nature, no more than murder and theft with the royal law of doing to others as we would they should do unto us."[^8] His convictions led him to refuse to contribute financially to war: 
> In the year 1756, [there] being a bloody war between France and England and a number of our youth drafted, . . . the inhabitants concluded to open a subscription to hire volunteers, which seemed so plausible many Friends were much taken with it. . . . But it opened very clear to me . . . that to hire men to do what I could not for conscience sake do myself was very inconsistent. This led in the deeps for wisdom, and refused demands to defray war expenses (though my part might appear as a drop in the ocean, yet it is made up of drops), for which I went through a great deal of reproach. . . . When my goods were taken and sold for half value some would pity me, saying I should be ruined, others would call it stubbornness.[^9]

[^8]: _Journal of Joshua Evans_, autobiography, [pp. 12](/journals/A0011540#page012). 
[^9]: _Journal of Joshua Evans_, autobiography, [pp. 11-12](/journals/A0011540#page011).

## Native Americans
Joshua Evans was also well-known for his advocacy for the fair treatment of Native Americans, and served on the Indian Committee of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting. Though it was not a formal Quaker testimony, Friends had a reputation for supporting the rights of Native peoples that stretched back to the Treaty of Shackamaxon between William Penn and Tamenend. Evans, however, argued that the actions of his Quaker contemporaries did not align with their rhetoric. In his critique of imported goods, for example, Evans asked how his fellows could "avoid those just reflections cast on us that none are more anxious for land than Friends are. Yea, may it not justly be said that we are pushing them forward who are cruelly destroying the Indians?"[^10] Elsewhere he made his concerns over Quaker complicity more explicit still: 
> We have had a share in the oppression of the Indians and Negroes, . . . and our hands not clear of contributing to the shedding [of] so much innocent blood, and coveting their land, and so nearly following the armies who cut in pieces men, women, and children without mercy—is this doing to others as we would they should do to us?[^11]

[^10]: _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1797-05-05](/journals/A0011543#1797-05-05).
[^11]: _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1797-09-04](/journals/A0011543#1797-09-04).

Evans's peace testimony and belief in the golden rule played a part in his advocacy for the fair treatment of Native Americans. He asserted that Friends could not ethically occupy land that had been taken from Native peoples by force, and worried that Friends' apparent beneficence towards Native Americans hid a hunger for land at their expense. For example, during his travels in Tennessee Evans encountered hundreds of white settler families moving into the back country, and he found it distressing 
> to think where those dear little children was going—to strengthen the hands of men destroying the Indians, and take from them their lands by the hands of wicked cruel men that sticketh not to murder these poor Natives. This was trying to behold, that Friends did not stand clear but was following on after and settling the land thus obtained, Indians being violently forced off their lands, then (to hide their cruelty) would give them just as much as they pleased (which the Indians are forced to take, that or nothing) and then cry a fair purchase. This was so far from doing as we would be done unto that I could but bear my testimony faithfully against all their conduct. . . .

> It appeareth to me the land is stained with the blood of the Negroes and Indians, and the cry of the slain no doubt hath reached the holy ear. If we could put ourselves in their conditions, . . . we should hardly bid them good speed as now is too common. And I fear our Society stands not clear but feels a kind of gladness to hear of more land being obtained from the poor Natives, so that we may have our borders enlarged if they the Indians should starve for want of bread.[^12]

[^12]: _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1797-04-18](/journals/A0011543#1797-04-18).

However, the peace testimony motivated Evans more in the case of Indigenous people in the southern Appalachians than it did near his home in New Jersey, where large numbers of white settlers has been present much longer. Here he offered material support to local Native American communities, bringing them food and supplies[^13] and caring for several older widows at his home,[^14] and urged Friends to do likewise. In this context Evans's invocation of the golden rule was intertwined with concerns over obligation and memory. He sought to reciprocate "kindnesses" of earlier times,[^15] which he saw as a form of debt at risk of being forgotten:
> I write this that the next generation may see that some of us loved the Natives, and do remember what we have heard our fathers say of the kindness of the Indians to the first settlers when the Indians was many and the whites but few. And now the whites are many and the Indians few, let us not forget to be kind to them. . . . Let my children always remember, this land was once theirs, and a good living, and although we bought it, it was at so low a rate, they not knowing the improvements we should make would spoil their hunting as it has done, and reduce them to so great wants. I think we took the advantage of their ignorance, but I see that we, on the ground of strict justice, we are indebted to them, and do not let us forget the royal law of doing to others as we would they should do to us.[^16]
Here Evans asked future generations to remember both their obligations to Native peoples and his own cognizance of those obligations. A self-conscious desire "that the next generation may see that some of loved the Natives and do remember" mixes with the general principle the _Journal_ aims to pass along. And it is important to note that Evans's framing of the declining Native population of New Jersey as an unattributable demographic change ("the Indians was many and the whites but few, and now the whites are many and the Indians few") does much to elide the active and sometimes violent role played by white settlers.

[^13]: For example, _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1795-03-26](/journals/A0011541#1795-03-26).
[^14]: _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1795-12-12](/journals/A0011541#1795-12-12) and [1796-02-09](/journals/A0011541#1796-02-09).
[^15]: "This, I believe, would . . . preserve and brighten the chain of friendship that was between our fathers and their fathers at the first settling of this land. For they lived in great friendship since my memory, which is about sixty years ago, for then there was many Indians, and we lived as brothers, for they was kind to us, and we to them. This makes me love Indians, for I cannot forget it." _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1795-12-07](/journals/A0011541#1795-12-07).
[^16]: _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1795-03-26](/journals/A0011541#1795-03-26).


## Antislavery

Finally, Evans was a vocal opponent of slavery, which is especially evident in the account of his travels in the southern slave states. Like the fair treatment of Native Americans, antislavery was not a formal Quaker testimony. In fact, in the first half of the 18th century, many Friends were enslavers or participants in the trade of enslaved people.[^17] However, Evans was part of a wave of antislavery Quakers in the second half of the century, including [John Woolman](/people/w6wr0v4m), [Anthony Benezet](/people/w6s1844s), and [John Churchman](/people/w6cg1kgr), who sought to eliminate slavery among Friends or even to end it altogether. By the end of Evans's life in 1798, this movement had largely succeeded in persuading Quakers to manumit the people they enslaved or expelling those who refused, though the broader goal of completely abolishing slavery proved more difficult.

[^17]: Donna McDaniel and Vanessa Julye, _Fit for Freedom, Not for Friendship: Quakers, African Americans, and the Myth of Racial Justice_ (Philadelphia: Quaker Press of Friends General Conference, 2009), pp. 3–8.

Evans was part of this antislavery wave from near its beginning; as early as 1761, he visited enslavers to advocate for manumission, and the same year he began avoiding the products of enslaved labor.[^18] However, his opposition to slavery shows in the journal most clearly during his travels in the southern slave states from 1796 to 1798. Evans was apalled by the southern institution of slavery. He wrote frequently about how inhumanely enslaved people were treated, emphasizing their lack of decent food, clothing, shelter, and rest, and contrasting their conditions with the wealth and excess of enslavers. The following passage, which Evans wrote only a month into his southern travels, is fairly representative:
> Pride and oppression aboundeth. The slaves bear the burden, for they are naked and starving . . . , though the rich are very wasteful and luxurious, who live on the sweat of the faces of their slaves. For the white people oppress the slaves and labor but little themselves, for that is become a reproach, for a young man that has no slaves is but little thought of, as also a young woman. It has been a trying circumstance to see their poor naked bodies in cold weather, when the sons of their oppressors and their haughty daughters walking with their stretched forth necks and wanton looks with their long tailed gowns trailing on the ground some near half a yard, which might cover many of their poor naked bodies. And what these waste and lavish away in luxuriousness at the tables of the proud and haughty might feed many of the hungry needy blacks who they sorely oppress. . . . My heart has been pained within me from the sight of mine eyes to see the poor naked bodies of men, women, and children, some in part and some wholly so, not having a single rag on more than they was born with, when I thought it cold enough to wear a greatcoat, and some of the Blacks wholly naked. Yet those wicked oppressors are pretending to draw near the Lord . . . , and yet some of these will have children by those they oppress.[^19]

[^18]: "1761. This year . . . the demonstration of the spirit led me . . . to plead for the liberty of the Black people, and to visit those who held them, and that from house to house. This went hard with some who thought it would make uneasiness between them and their Blacks, and would scarcely suffer us to perform the visit, but I saw it was the Lord’s work, yet we need be as wise as serpents and harmless as doves. Truth opened our way to proceed, to sit down in silence with the whole family, and our communications gave the Blacks no knowledge of our business with their master, but when the other parts of the family withdrew, we pleaded with the master and mistress, and truth favored us to do it in a way as gave general satisfaction. And I never felt a greater reward than in pleading the cause of those captive people. Another trial came on, it seemed as though the cries of the slaves in the West Indies reached my ears day and night for some months and in a special manner when partaking of their labor, and did believe it was required of me to use the fruits of their labor no longer. Many thought this going too far, and thought we might use what we bought and paid for, and cast many reflections on me for my conduct herein, but being convinced my peace lay at stake I bore all with patience, till many of my opposers saw it and the testimony spread to my admiration." _Journal of Joshua Evans_, autobiography, [pp. 10–11](/journals/A0011540#page010). 
[^19]: _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1796-11-17](/journals/A0011543#1796-11-17).

As the end of this entry shows, Evans also acknowledged the sexual violence inherent to slavery, though he tended to frame it from a perspective of virtue and chastity. While this early entry is fairly circumspect, Evans became more strident over the course of his travels, eventually writing that "the abomination that many are guilty of with these poor creatures is that some of their cruel hard taskmasters will be guilty of fornication and adultery with those they use so cruelly, when many of those poor Black women, however modest, dare not say nay, for some of them have received a hundred stripes for so doing."[^20]

[^20]: _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1797-03-07](/journals/A0011543#1797-03-07)

During his time in the south, Evans developed a comprehensive theory of the negative effects of slavery on southern society. Like many other white northeners, Evans saw enslavement as detrimental not only to enslaved people but also to their enslavers, and he argued that the luxurious living conditions of enslavers endangered their physical and spiritual health. Evans thought that this lifestyle shortened the lives of enslavers, but (perhaps due to his own asceticism) he did not believe that the deprivations faced by enslaved people had a similar effect.[^21] He also blamed slavery for poor crop yields in the region: 
> I believe there is a cloud of darkness hangeth over the inhabitants, because of oppression and the blood of many cryeth from the ground and reacheth to heaven against those murderers that kill the poor blacks, as it were inch by inch with cruel whipping, hunger, and nakedness. I believe is the ground cause of these blastings and the reason why the earth bringeth not forth its increase. And no marvel to me, when those poor blacks that does the labor and beareth the burden and heat, and that in a cruel manner.[^22]

[^21]: "The blacks in these parts are much the longest lived and most healthy, for the whites mostly die young, and but here and there one lives to an advanced age. It is said a sickly place. But it is not so with the blacks, who fair hard with nakedness, hunger, and cold, lodge as doth the dogs. These live to old age, mostly lust and stout, their children seldom sickly or die young. I believe it is owing to the manner of living, for the white people live luxuriously and lazy, for the most part, depend on the labor of the blacks." _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1796-11-04](/journals/A0011543#1796-11-04). "Where we lodged lived an aged Friend, who informed me that within twenty miles distance was but one white man of his age (being upwards of sixty), and in that distance was more then twenty black men of that age. This he thought was occasioned by luxurious living that shortened the days of the whites, and so it is in many of these southern parts the blacks are much the longest lived, and I believed it is not because they have got a black skin but owing to their way and manner of living. For the black fare hard and live on coarse food, and that but scanty." Ibid., [1797-11-18](/journals/A0011543#1797-11-18).

[^22]: _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1797-03-07](/journals/A0011543#1797-03-07).


The "sin and iniquity" Evans saw in the south led him to believe that a "mighty overturning" would come to the region. He first expressed this idea early in 1797,[^23] but did not give it full force until near the end of his life in 1798:
> I thought it would be no marvel if it should come to pass that a turn of times should take place when the masters and mistresses with their children should be out at work amongst the tobacco in nakedness and hunger as the poor oppressed slaves now do, and that the same measure be measure to them as they have done to the poor Negroes. . . . 

>But have I believed that there will be a mighty overturning in this land, so that the oppressed will go free and the oppressor will be the oppressed, both them and their wives and children. This will be by the mighty power of God, and no man shall be able to deliver those when he will arise to shake terribly the Earth and the resting places of the wicked slave holders. Oh that they may repent, so that the Lord may show mercy before this overflowing surge overtakes the inhabitants of those southern countries, where there is so much innocent blood been shed and tearing parents from children and children from parents and selling them like the beasts. . . . 

>Thus has been the feelings of my mind as I have passed through those lands, and I believe that time is coming to pass, and unless by sincere repentance and an amendment of life and to do justly so far as is in their powers, it over take the inhabitants of those southern countries where there is so much of those poor oppressed Blacks."[^24]

[^23]: "I believe some day there will be an overturning, and a terrible day it will be, for it appeareth to me the land is stained with the blood of the Negroes and Indians, and the cry of the slain no doubt hath reached the holy ear." _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1797-04-18](/journals/A0011543#1797-04-18). The entry for [1797-03-04](/journals/A0011543#1797-03-04) may be an earlier allusion to this idea.
[^24]: _Journal of Joshua Evans,_ [1798-05-29](/journals/A0011543#1798-05-29/1798-05-30).
